🖐️ Hand Detection using Traditional Computer Vision
📌 Overview

This project implements a real-time hand detection system using traditional computer vision techniques without relying on deep learning models. The system detects and tracks hand regions using skin color segmentation, contour detection, and convex hull algorithms.

It is lightweight, efficient, and suitable for low-resource systems like laptops and embedded devices.

🎯 Features
Real-time hand detection using webcam
Skin color segmentation in HSV color space
Noise reduction using Gaussian Blur and Morphological Operations
Contour detection for identifying hand shape
Convex Hull for outlining hand structure
Works without any machine learning or pretrained models
🛠️ Technologies Used
Python
OpenCV
NumPy
📂 Project Structure
Hand-Detection/
│── hand_detection.py
│── README.md
⚙️ Installation
1. Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/your-username/hand-detection-cv.git
cd hand-detection-cv
2. Install dependencies
pip install opencv-python numpy
▶️ Usage

Run the script:

python hand_detection.py
Controls:
Press ESC to exit the application
🧠 How It Works
1. Region of Interest (ROI)

A fixed region is selected from the webcam feed where the hand is expected.

2. Skin Color Segmentation

The image is converted from BGR to HSV color space, and a mask is created to detect skin-colored pixels.

3. Preprocessing
Gaussian Blur removes noise
Dilation and erosion improve mask quality
4. Contour Detection

The largest contour is assumed to be the hand.

5. Convex Hull

A convex hull is drawn around the detected hand to highlight its structure.

📸 Output
Live webcam feed with detected hand contour
Binary mask showing segmented hand region
🚀 Future Improvements
Finger counting
Gesture recognition (like 👍 ✌️)
Mouse control using hand gestures
Background subtraction for better accuracy
Integration with robotics systems (e.g., rover control)
⚠️ Limitations
Sensitive to lighting conditions
Skin color detection may vary across users
Works best with simple backgrounds
💡 Why Traditional Computer Vision?
No need for large datasets
Lightweight and fast
Works on low-end hardware
Easy to understand and implement
🤝 Contributing

Feel free to fork this repository and improve the project!

📜 License

This project is open-source and available under the MIT License.

👨‍💻 Author

Padala Monish Reddy
